# Soy Story

Miso is a fermented paste made from a mash of cooked soybeans, koji, and salt. Like vinegar, miso is a two-stage fermentation. First, the fungusAspergillus oryzaeis grown on either rice or barley to produce koji (read theKojichapter) for a deeper understanding of this process). Then the powerful enzymes produced by koji, namely protease and amylase, are harnessed to dismantle the protein and starch in another substrate (traditionally soybeans), cleaving them into amino acids and simple sugars, respectively. Wild yeast, lactic acid bacteria, and acetic acid bacteria also add to the fugue of flavors as the miso ages.

It’s difficult to fathom the stroke of creative genius—and luck—that inspired some brave soul to combine moldy rice with cooked soybeans, let it sit for months, and then taste it. We are forever indebted to that act of culinary audacity, as miso is by far the most astounding transformation in the world of fermentation. Time, bacteria, and fungus conspire to convert one-dimensional, everyday staples into arresting new concoctions. One seemingly defies the laws of physics by creating wholly new matter out of thin air.I didn’t put bananas or nuts in here! How can this taste so strongly of bananas and nuts!?

The full story of how miso came to be is intertwined with the domestication of the sacred soybean, the complicated history between China and Japan, and the dharmic philosophy of nonviolence.

First, the soybean.

As with almost every ancient civilization, China’s early exis-tence hinged on the domestication of nutrient-rich crops. What maize was to Mesoamerica, or chickpeas to the Middle East, soybeans were to East Asia. There is no more efficient way to produce protein than to grow soy. It yields nearly twenty times more protein per hectare than grazing cattle or using the land for growing fodder. Of the twenty amino acids that our bodies require to function, there are nine that we can’t produce on our own. Soybeans are one of the few plant foods on earth that contain all nine of these essential amino acids.

The earliest evidence points to the cultivation of small, wild soybeans about 7,600 years ago in northern China. The selective breeding of soybeans for increased size began at least 5,000 years ago in China, but may also have started around the same time in Japan. Regardless of its true origins, soy has proven absolutely essential to the region’s foodways. In Chinese lore, the “God Farmer” Shennong, a mythical deity, is said to have proclaimed five crops as sacred: rice, wheat, barley, millet, and soybeans.

But nutritive value notwithstanding, it wasn’t until soy met fermentation that its true culinary potential was realized.

Before miso, there wasjiang.Jiangs(translating roughly to “pastes”) encompass a large array of Chinese condiments and ferments—many that don’t contain fermented soybeans at all. In fact, the oldest jiangs were supposedly made from fish or meat, and resembled a sort of thick hybrid between garum (see the chapter onGarum) and miso. As practices of animal husbandry improved through the ages, the imperative to preserve the valuable nutrition of wild meats eased bit by bit, causing the main protein source within jiangs to shift from animals to vegetables over generations. Descendants of these ancient jiangs persist today as well-known condiments, including hoisin, oyster sauce, and fermented black bean paste. Fermented black soybeans, ordouchi, may be one of the first fermented soy products to come out of China, with references dating as far back as 90 BCE.

*Glycine max, aka the soybean.*

China’s closest living relative to miso ishuang jiang(“yellow paste”), where soybeans are steamed and mixed with half their weight in wheat flour before being pressed into bricks and placed on reed mats to undergo wild fermentation in the open air. After a couple of weeks, wild molds that have grown on the surface of the bricks are brushed off and the bricks are mixed with a saline brine, further fermenting into a viscous, salty paste.

When Chinese Buddhist monks arrived in Japan in the sixth century to “enlighten” the people of the island nation, they brought jiangs with them. The Japanese would absorb the idea of fermenting soybeans and run with it.

In the seventh century, in accordance with the recently introduced dharmic belief in nonviolence, the Japanese emperor Tenmu banned the consumption of farmed animal meat. The mandate, which stayed in effect for more than six decades, created a void in people’s diets that had to be filled by vegetarian sources of protein. Soybeans, in the form of fresh edamame, tofu, and miso, took center stage, along with rice and other grains. As miso’s importance grew, so too did its utility and variety. For starters, Japanese miso makers brought greater control to the fermentation process by first growing mold on grains, before introducing soybeans to the process.

Miso making became a specialized industry. Early miso (hishio) was more a gloopy mash than a thick paste. Over centuries, recipes were refined and fractured into local specialties. In Japan there are dozens upon dozens of varieties of miso, made in myriad styles. There are a number of variables to play with in the miso-making process, each capable of having a profound effect on the outcome: the specific strain ofAspergillusmold used to inoculate the koji; the type of rice or barley upon which the koji grows; the method of cooking the soybeans; and the length of time and conditions in which you age the miso. The results can range from red and earthyakamiso; to rich, chocolaty, saltyhatchomiso; to sweetsaikyomiso. In 2015, when the Noma staff had the chance to spend several months traveling through Japan for a pop-up stint in Tokyo, we felt utterly spoiled for choice.

And all this is to say nothing of the soybean-paste traditions in other parts of Asia. Korea, for instance, has its own broad lineage ofjangs that developed contemporaneously with misos. Like Chinese jiangs,jangis an umbrella term that covers a bevy of fermented products—many but not all made from soy.Cheonggukjangis a quick-fermented, chunky analogue to miso, made with the aid of the bacteriaBacillus subtilis.Doenjang, on the other hand, is a more labor-intensive soy-based ferment that bears striking resemblance to the ancienthuang jangsof China. It begins withmeju—dried soybeans that are cooked until tender and then pressed in a wooden box until they firm into a brick. The brick is then removed and wrapped in rice hay, where bacteria and molds endemic to the hay—including wildAspergillus—further ferment the meju brick for two months. Finally, the meju is transferred to earthenware pots, mixed with a saltwater brine, and left to ferment for a year. The resulting liquid is akin to a much funkier soy sauce, calledganjang. The fermented solids are doenjang, which is often allowed to age for several more years on its own.Gochujang, one of our all-time favorite ferments, also begins with meju, but contains a sizable addition of chiles and glutinous rice flour.

Fermented bean pastes also spread throughout Southeast Asia. In Thailand, we findtai jiew, much wetter and funkier than miso. Indonesia hastauco, which is quite sweet from the addition of palm sugar. And Vietnam produces the less viscoustuong, which you may have consumed as a dip with summer rolls. The fact that this technique has spread throughout Asia—and even as far as chilly Copenhagen—speaks to its tremendous appeal. Miso is contagious.

*Mejuare compacted bricks of fermented soybeans that serve as the basis of several Korean ferments.*
