# How Shoyu Gets Made

The earliest Chinese jiangs blurred the line between what we would now consider the separate realms of miso, garum, and shoyu. They often contained meat or seafood, and jiang you was originally a chunky, murky liquid—far different from any soy sauce we know today. Similarly, the earliest misos of Japan were a very rough version of today’s products. They contained all the same ingredients, buthishio(aka proto-miso) was more like a cross between a miso and a soy sauce.

Over time, hishio became more refined, eventually becoming the thick paste we know as miso today. At first, tamari remained a by-product, but as demand increased, people began making adjustments to traditional miso recipes in order to harvest more tamari. New styles of fermenting vats were manufactured with perforated troughs that led to spouts. Recipes with higher ratios of water were implemented. But it wasn’t until the seventeenth century that the method for producing soy sauce evolved into the first version employed today.

We’ll detail that method here, but first, let it be noted that shoyu is yet another example of a miraculous foodstuff created through the biochemical tool kit housed withinAspergillus oryzae. Its production bears similarities to koji and, of course, miso, but there are a couple of fundamental differences in the shoyu-making process. To make miso, you combineAspergillus-inoculated rice or barley with soybeans and allow them to ferment together. With shoyu, the mold is grown directly on a blend of boiled soybeans and toasted, cracked wheat. When you’re making a conventional koji, you would ideally steam—rather than boil—the rice or barley so as not to oversaturate or drown theAspergillus. But legumes like soybeans don’t cook properly if they’re steamed; they need to be submerged in water. The wheat is there to mediate the extra moisture. (This is why tamari is free of gluten, but soy sauce is not.)

Whereas in the production of something like sake, where koji is harnessed to unlock simple sugars tied up in starch, in shoyu, the aim is to useAspergillusto break down vegetable proteins into the amino acids that make up soy sauce’s rich medley of umami flavors. (In many soy sauce factories,Aspergillus sojaeis the preferred strain ofAspergillus, as it’s been bred specifically for stronger protease activity.) By growing theAspergillusdirectly on the beans and wheat, the protease produced by the fungus gets to work directly on the proteins in those substrates.

Once inoculated, the soybean-wheat koji goes into a brine of 20% to 23% salinity. Different recipes call for different ratios of salt brine to koji, but ideally the total mixture should have a salinity of 15% to 16%. The nutrient-rich fluid is left open to the air, and the high salt content prevents unwanted microbes from taking hold. Beneficial halotolerant (salt-tolerant) microbes add a mild alcohol content and rich bouquet of complex acids to the best bottles of artisanal shoyu.

Over time, what begins as a heterogeneous soup of beans and bits of wheat (known asmoromi—a term shared with an analogous step in sake brewing) slowly transforms into a gloopy mass with the viscous texture of baby food. As with miso, the enzymes produced by the koji slowly snip proteins into amino acids, leading soy sauce to be chock-full of glutamic acid, among other delicious organic building blocks. The enzymes work much more efficiently in a fluid medium than in a viscous one like miso.

*Large batches ofmoromiare stirred in giant cedar vats calledkioke.*

Traditionally, shoyu production would take place in massive cedar vats calledkioke, measuring around 2 meters across and almost 3 meters deep. Like miso, shoyu would be started in the winter months after the harvest, avoiding high summer temperatures that could adversely speed up enzymatic and microbial activity. The mixture would be stirred every day for the first few weeks, then left to ferment for up to three years. Once ready, the moromi would be ladled onto multiple sheets of cloth and stacked in a large rectangular wooden press. A huge lever would drive a wooden plate downward, pressing the liquid out of the moromi. Once all the shoyu had been extracted from the moromi, the remaining sediment would be as stiff and dry as cardboard. It was often handed off to farmers as animal feed. The strained shoyu would be left to settle, strained once more, heat-treated, and bottled.
