# Carthaginian Fish Sauce

*Ancient Carthaginian garum factories were carved out of limestone in ports along the Mediterranean Sea.*

Garum’s story begins in North Africa 2,500 years ago, when the walled Phoenician metropolis of Carthage was a booming port in what is present-day Tunisia. Within the city walls, surpluses of fish harvested from the flourishing waters of the Mediterranean Sea—tuna, mackerel, anchovies, sardines—were sliced finely, scales, heads, guts, and all, then layered with salt in limestone vats and left to ferment. Nets draped over the vats would keep larger animals and flies out. The heat of the sun would effectively cook the fish, while the salinity would act as a safeguard against the propagation of harmful microbes. Most important, the guts of the fish contained enzymes that fueled the transformation from vat of fish parts to potent seasoning.

The Carthaginians enjoyed a reign over the Mediterranean for close to five hundred years, until the city fell to the Roman Empire in the Second Punic Wars. To the victor go the spoils, and as Carthage changed hands, so did its culinary practices. Though the product originated in North Africa, the Romans are the ones credited with the dissemination ofgarum—a Latin word derived from the name of a specific fish species. Sicily, with its proximity to Carthage, was likely where the gospel of fish sauce first spread, and it served as the center of garum production in the ancient Roman Empire.

In much the same way that nuoc mam is used in Vietnamese cuisine as both a dipping sauce and a seasoning, garums would have been served at the table but also kept in the kitchen to be used with wine as a cooking sauce calledoenogarum. Garums served the Roman army well, too. Soldiers could carry the concentrated salty liquid in a flask and dilute it while in the field. After the Third Punic Wars and the Roman annexation of Iberia, garums spread west. In southern Spain, ruins of garum factories carved out of limestone are still standing to this day.

As garum grew, specialized classifications emerged. The sediment left over after straining a batch of garum was known asallec. It was deemed undesirable by elites and left to the commoners.Muriawas garum made from fish that were gutted and had their heads removed, which would have rendered the finished sauce less pungent.Haimation, a fermented product that consisted of nothing but the guts and blood of fish, was made from the by-products of fisheries. Its dark color also led it to be dubbed “black garum.”Liquamenwas once a term distinct from garum, as it was used concurrently in early Roman times, though it isn’t entirely clear what the difference was. Some believe it to be a second steeping of the allec in an attempt to extract more yield from the fermented fish. Others explain it as garum made specifically with whole fish, whereasgarumis an umbrella term for the larger family of related sauces.

What’s even less clear is why garum fell out of fashion in the West. The last vestige of garum in Europe is a rare Italian sauce calledcolatura di alici, traditionally made in the small fishing village of Cetara. Its recipe was recovered by monks in the Middle Ages from much older Roman texts. Meanwhile, fish sauce remains a bedrock of Southeast Asian cuisine and an ingredient that many of us are far more familiar with. The process of making it is remarkably similar. Anchovies fished from the Gulf of Thailand are placed into large wooden vats, layered with salt in a ratio of two or three parts fish to one part salt. The salted fish are pressed beneath a bamboo mat weighted down with rocks and left in the tropical sun for 9 to 12 months, before being pressed and strained for their juices. Most of the fish sauce you’ve tasted in your life is made this way.

The curious thing about Asian fish sauces is that there aren’t many references to them in historical documents from the region before the seventh century. Cultural exchange between the Roman Empire and Asia was established long before then. Given garum’s value to ancient Romans and its portability, it’s tempting to draw a connection between Thai fish sauce and garum, as opposed to assuming both products were developed independently. It’s fun to imagine a direct line between the vastly disparate cooking styles of Southeast Asia and the Mediterranean, but we’ll leave that for more qualified parties to decide.

<!-- text/part0012_split_003.html -->

html
