# Better Living Through Koji

*Glutamate (C5H8NO4) is the delicious taste of umami in molecular form.*

The flavor molecule most responsible for garum’s deliciousness is glutamic acid. Glutamic acid is an amino acid that is present in almost all proteins. In its free form (just hanging out, not part of a protein chain), it can be found in especially high concentrations in meats, cheeses, tomatoes, seaweed, and wheat. When the proteolytic enzymes in a vat of garum cleave apart the proteins in fish or meat, it frees molecules of glutamic acid, which then give up a free positive charge to become glutamate. Glutamate, in turn, binds to mineral ions like sodium to form monosodium glutamate (MSG).

Aside from being a well-known powdered food additive, MSG is naturally responsible for some of the world’s most delicious foods, from ramen to risotto. It registers on the tongue not as a flavor, per se, but as the sensation of umami—the “fifth element” of taste, often thought of as the essence of savoriness, first postulated in the early 1900s by the Japanese chemist Kikunae Ikeda. Perhaps the best descriptor of its flavor is “moreish”—as in, when you taste it, you want more. Glutamates can even evoke the physiological reaction of salivation, literally making your mouth water.

We’re primed for umami from birth—human breast milk contains ten times as much free glutamate as cow’s milk. During breastfeeding, the glutamate content in milk rises steadily as infants nurse, to the point where it can account for as much as 50 percent of the total free amino acids. We even have glutamate receptors in our gut that signal our brains as we begin eating something rich in umami: Our appetite immediately increases, but we feel sated sooner and for longer than when we eat a low-umami meal. We’re hardwired to find umami satisfying, and we seek it out as a result.

While the most pronounced feature of garums and fish sauces is the powerful funk generated by autolysis and fermentation, the smell is actually misleading. The stinkiness is something you come to appreciate, but the glutamates are the foundation of garum’s appeal, elevating all that they touch. Now, say you wanted to mitigate garum’s aroma while maintaining its complexity and glutamic content. You could omit the guts responsible for autolysis, but you’d need some other tool to break down protein into amino acids. And in koji, once again, we find a friend.

Koji produces enzymes called proteases, which we use at Noma to break down the proteins in beef, squid, mackerel, clams, and other protein sources. Put simply, koji steps in and does the job of the digestive enzymes in the guts of fish, yielding a finished product with as much umami as the traditional method, but a far more pleasant smell.

In order to produce a faster garum, we also ferment ours in a room held at 60°C/140°F. While this temperature precludes microbial activity, it accelerates enzymatic activity to a maxi-mum while simultaneously facilitating Maillard reactions that imbue the sauce with the flavor of roasted meat. At this temperature, we can typically go from a bucket of meat to fully finished garum in 10 to 12 weeks. You’ll notice distinctive changes in the product as those weeks go by. At first, it tastes like a murky stock, but after the first week or so, the enzymatic action takes off and you can sense the umami building. After about a month, more caramelized flavors step to the front. By the end, everything sits in delicious harmony.

It’s possible that you find something inherently worrisome about placing raw flesh into salt water with moldy grains and letting them sit for months, but rest assured, garums are by far the most precise and safe ferments we make at Noma. The high salt content (about 12% by weight), coupled with the high temperature, creates an environment that nearly all food-borne pathogens can’t tolerate.

Meanwhile, we’re continually trying to dissect garum and rebuild it in different ways. We’ve experimented with a variation that omits water, and ended up with a much thicker mixture that resembles Thai shrimp paste. We’ve made garums with protein-rich plant matter, like peas, that work well but shouldn’t be left in the heat for as long as animal protein. We’ve also tried garums with more unconventional sources of protein, like bee pollen, grasshoppers, moth larvae, and pig’s blood. There’s plenty more to explore in this vein. For the adventurous spirits out there, take a look at pineapple and papaya. They’re both fruits heavy with proteolytic enzymes, and you might be able to conjure up a tropical garum. We don’t get many pineapples here in Denmark, but it’s an idea.

*Deep-Sea Snow Crab and Cured Egg Yolk, Noma Australia, 2016*

*Steamed crab is dressed with a sauce made from egg yolks cured in kangaroo and beef garums.*

*Garum was traditionally a sauce made from decomposing fish, but at Noma we begin with ground beef.*

<!-- text/part0012_split_006.html -->

html
