# Cleanliness, Pathogens, and Safety

Cleanliness is something we take very seriously in the kitchen, out of both pride for our workplace and respect for our colleagues. However, a clean and sanitary workplace is doubly important in the fermentation lab, in order to prevent unwanted pathogens from invading a ferment and causing it to taste off or, worse, become dangerous to eat. At Noma, we always err on the side of caution. If something you’ve made smellswrong—not just funky like fish sauce, but nose-stingingly rotten—trust your nose. If you taste a small sample and it turns your stomach, remember that your body is designed to reject things that may be harmful to you. When in doubt, throw it out. If you’re ever unsure of a fermented product, toss it. The weeks or months of your invested time are not worth risking your health.

Potentially harmful microbes are ever present in the environment. Bacteria can multiply speedily, with or without oxygen, at temperatures ranging from 4.5° to 50°C/40° to 122°F, especially in moist, nutrient-rich environments. Of course, that describes the exact circumstances in which many fermented goods are produced. Both the World Health Organization and the United States Department of Agriculture recommend cooking foods sensitive to pathogenic contamination above 70°C/158°F before consumption. Now, that’s a fairly severe safeguard, and obviously not possible for many ferments. That being said, you should be cautious, but not worried. Fermentation is meant to be a rewarding and exhilarating practice, but remember that you’re playing with live ammo.

*Cleanliness is next to godliness (and also crucial to a safe and successful ferment).*

Throughout this book, we do our best to provide clear instructions that will produce safe and delicious products if followed closely. Don’t eyeball measurements or take shortcuts. When a recipe calls for a specific salt content (above 10 percent by weight) or pH (below 4.5), it’s to ensure that you’re fermenting safely. But of course, the first step in preventing unwanted microorganisms from taking hold in a ferment is to make sure your equipment and hands are clean before they come into contact with food. While this is less important in certain cases, it’s critical in other instances. When making koji, for example, you’ll need to be sure the incubation chamber is properly sanitized before introducing the inoculated grains. And when working with your hands, wear nitrile or latex gloves to prevent contamination (except in places where a little bacteria from your skin can help things along, as with lactic-acid fermentation).

Now, what do we mean by “clean”? There is a difference between the level of cleanliness you would expect to find in a university biology lab and that in a home or restaurant kitchen. Let’s define some terms.Cleaningmeans that you’ve removed visible dirt from the surface of objects. Soap and water will cleana surface but do very little to reduce the surface’s population of microorganisms, good or bad.Sterilizedimplies that you’ve eradicatedalllife-forms—viruses, bacteria, fungi—on your equipment and your work surfaces (and sometimes even in the product you’re looking to ferment). This is a level of certainty required in hospitals and microbiology labs. You’ll never need something as serious as an industrial-strength autoclave for a recipe in this book. What we’re looking to do for the recipes here issanitize. To sanitize a piece of equipment or work surface implies that you’ve removedmostmicrobiological life. That will be sufficient for our purposes. Running your equipment through a hot cycle in a dishwasher or steaming or boiling it for a few minutes is more than enough to ensure that you’re working clean and sanitarily. If your equipment is heatproof, dry-heat sterilization is another option. Ceramic, glass, and metal containers and utensils can be baked in the oven for 2 hours at 160°C/320°F to ensure that they’re free of contaminants.

For equipment or work surfaces that you can’t pop into the dishwasher, there are common sanitizers intended for food production and fermentation like StarSan (available at many home-brew shops), distilled white vinegar (a sanitizing agent favored by grandmas the world over), and even household bleach diluted with water to 20 milliliters per liter (as long as you rinse with fresh water afterward). At Noma, for large items like crocks and buckets, we disinfect using ethanol diluted with filtered water to 60 percent alcohol by volume (ABV)—40 milliliters water for every 60 milliliters ethanol. (We dilute it because if the percentage of ethanol is too high, it can actually coagulate the proteins that make up the cell walls of many microbes and prevent them from dying.) We put the solution in a spray bottle and spray whatever needs to be sanitized, let it sit for 10 to 15 minutes, then wipe it off with a paper towel.

Finally, while a great deal of time is spent in this book introducing the amazing microorganisms responsible for fermentation, it’s equally important to acquaint ourselves with the microbes that can make things go sideways. With a thorough grasp of pathogenic bacteria and molds, and what conditions they can tolerate, you’ll be better equipped to keep them out of your products.

*While many microbes are beneficial and the majority are harmless, there are still a few bad microbes that can cause illness.*
