## Clostridium botulinum

C. botulinumis the sporulating bacteria responsible for botulism. It is an anaerobic bacteria that thrives in nutrient-rich, warm environments. Its spores are commonly found dormant in soil and water, waiting for favorable conditions to propagate and release potent neurotoxins. Ingesting just a microgram of botulism toxin is enough to cause serious illness. You cannot taste or smell botulism toxin, and thus the only way to guarantee safety is through careful attention to best practices.

Though cases of botulism poisoning are rare, it’s usually found in improperly refrigerated animal products or improperly canned vegetable products (where canning temperatures were not hot enough and/or the canning liquid was not sufficiently acidic). Given that the spores of the bacteria are often found in the soil, special attention should be paid when fermenting roots, bulbs, and tubers. When making black garlic, for example, you’re keeping a root vegetable in an anaerobic environment at a warm temperature. However,C. botulinumcannot survive at a sustained temperature of 60°C/140°F. Your responsibility is to ensure that your heating chamber doesn’t dip below that threshold.

C. botulinumalso has great difficulty growing in fluid mediums with a water activity below 0.97 (achieved by salt concentrations of 5 percent or higher) and in acidic environments with a pH below 4.6. Many ferments in this book begin with salt concentrations lower than 5 percent and a pH above 4.6. However, the combined effect of moderate salt content and a gradually decreasing pH is usually enough to safeguard against malevolent bacteria. For instance, a vegetable brined at 2 percent salt will have a high enough salt content to inhibitC. botulinumwhile beneficial lactic acid bacteria lower the pH. If a ferment reaches a pH below 5 within the first two days and ends up below 4.6 by the time of completion, it is generally recognized as safe.
