# Salt and Baker’s Percentages

Salt is one of the most important factors in a safe and successful fermentation. For starters, it has the remarkable ability to inhibit biological processes of both microbes and humans. (There’s a reason why drinking salt water will kill you if you’re stranded at sea.) Salt is an ionic compound of sodium and chloride, which breaks apart into a sea of ions when it dissolves in water. Nature abhors imbalance, so anywhere they can, water and the salt ions dissolved in it will try to spread out into an even distribution. Put a piece of meat or a bacterial cell in a solution of salt, and water from inside will flow outward while salt ions flow inward, until eventually equilibrium is reached. It’s how brining works, and it’s also the mechanism by which pathogens likeSalmonellacan be killed with salt. Salt draws water out of the bacteria’s cells until they shrivel up and die. (For a more detailed explanation of this, see “Salt/Water”.) Knowing the salt tolerance of different microbes can make a world of difference in a ferment.

For that reason, we stress precise salt measurements, usually expressed in percentage by weight. Note that in the fermen-tation lab at Noma, we use baker’s percentages—when we tell you to add 2% salt to a kilogram of plums, we mean 2% of the weight of the plums (which comes out to 20 grams), not the total weight of the plumsandthe salt (which would be 20.4 grams). The difference is not always very significant, but using baker’s percentages streamlines the math.

Last, the type of salt makes a difference. We call for non-iodized salt, because iodine is mildly antimicrobial. While using standard table salt won’t stop a ferment cold, it can impede helpful microbes from gaining a strong foothold. Kosher salt will work well, and should be available in your local grocery store. Mineral-rich sea salts like fleur de sel are great, too, and can actually improve the texture of lacto-ferments.
