# Redox Redux

In theVinegarchapter, we met Antoine Lavoisier, the father of modern chemistry and the man responsible for identifying oxygen as the reagent responsible for combustion. However, he wasn’t actually the first person to publish research on the isolation of oxygen molecules. The English chemist Joseph Priestly, a collaborator of Lavoisier’s, actually takes the credit for that. Priestly heated a metallic compound—mercury oxide, then known as “red calx”—and observed that as the air in the flask was becoming more flammable, the calx itself was reducing in weight. What Priestly witnessed was areducingreaction (named because of the calx’s reduction in weight). Once heated, the mercury oxide (HgO) separated into its two constituent elements, releasing its oxygen and rendering the air more combustible.

What’s happening on the molecular level is an exchange: When mercury and oxygen first join to form mercury oxide, two atoms of mercury are surrendering an electron each to the oxygen. When the compound decomposes, the process is reversed. The electrons go back to their original owners, and gaseous oxygen is released into the air. Scientists initially believed that such reactions dealt exclusively with oxygen, and so, to this day, the act of a molecule or atom being stripped of an electron is known as “oxidation.” In Priestly’s experiment, the mercury is beingoxidized, and the mercury isreducingthe oxygen. Parallel chemical reactions like this are known asredoxreactions. Many of them involve oxygen, but there are plenty of other elements and compounds that can take part in redox reactions. However, one thing to note about redox reactions is that they are a two-way street. There is no oxidation without simultaneous reduction, and vice versa. Any time you hear about something being oxidized, you can be sure that something else is being reduced.

*The French physician Louis Camille Maillard first unlocked the secrets of browning. Maillard reactions are redox reactions that can take place between reducing sugars (found in starches) as well as amino acids (found in proteins).*

The Maillard reaction is a genre of redox reaction that is most frequently observed when cooking foods at high temperatures. It owes its name to Louis Camille Maillard, who was a young French physician when he discovered the process in the early 1900s at the University of Paris.

As mentioned above, there are many other elements and compounds besides oxygen that can participate in a redox reaction. This includes amino acids. When food is heated, sugars like fructose or glucose or those bound up in starch take part in redox reactions with free amino acids or those bound in protein chains. The reactions lead to highly unstable intermediary products that then further break down in a variety of ways, creating flavor compounds responsible for the color and delicious taste of browned food. The crust of bread, the seared surface of a scallop, brown butter—all these are products of the Maillard reaction. (It won’t necessarily come in handy here, but the reaction is expedited by alkaline environments, as observed in the crust of pretzels, which are soaked in a dilute lye solution before baking.) Different flavors will develop depending on which amino acids are present. The artificial-flavor industry accomplishes a lot of its work by choosing specific amino acids to undergo redox reactions.

Most Maillard reactions take place at temperatures well in excess of 115°C/239°F, when there is enough kinetic energy to force the reagents to interact. Water is so good at absorbing heat energy that regardless of how much thermal energy you add, mixtures containing water don’t tend to rise above water’s boiling point of 100°C/212°F until most of the water has boiled away. Therefore, in watery environments, it takes much longer for a Maillard reaction to take place. (Beyond this thermal effect, water can also inhibit the formation of certain products of the Maillard reaction.) But as mentioned earlier in this chapter and in theMisochapter, given enough time, the Maillard reaction will occur, even at low temperatures and in wet environments.

That might be a lot of chemistry to take in, but cookingischemistry. Every time you light your barbecue, bake a cake, or cure a ham, you’re carrying out multiple chemical reactions. Browning (and blackening) food is certainly all about chemistry. The Maillard reaction is only one of the chemical processes at work in a blackening chamber. As always, it’s worth having a grasp on the science to help you make adjustments or improvements down the road.

*Pear and Roasted Kelp Ice Cream, Noma, 2018*

*Black pears are blended into a paste and dried into fruit leather before being molded into imitation mussel shells and filled with kelp ice cream and licorice.*

<!-- text/part0013_split_003.html -->

html
